OpenTyrian DS
by Dopefish [ http://vespenegas.com ]

OVERVIEW

This is a port of Tyrian to the Nintendo DS.

It is based on OpenTyrian Classic (SVN r734), from the
fine folks at http://code.google.com/p/opentyrian/
Without their hard work, this would not be possible.


INSTALLATION

- DLDI patch the opentyrian.nds file for your homebrew device
- copy opentyrian.nds somewhere on your CF/SD card
- copy the /tyrian/ directory to the root of your CF/SD card

- you can omit the song_*.wav files if you're short on disk
  space, or if you don't care about the music


IMPORTANT NOTES

Save games are compatible with OpenTyrian on other platforms,
and even with the original DOS version (for verson 2.1 at least,
not sure about Tyrian2000), so if you happen to have a TYRIAN.SAV
file lying around, go ahead and copy it to your /tyrian/ directory.

Two-player support on a single DS does work, though actually playing
like that would likely be too awkward to be much fun--one
player would use the "keyboard" (D-pad and buttons),
while the other player uses the "mouse" (touchscreen).
Two-player network support (WiFi) is not currently supported.  

You may have to adjust the Detail Level (press Select in the middle of
a level to bring up the menu) on certain levels to get acceptable
performance.  It seems that most levels do fine under "High" or "Pentium",
but some levels use lots of transparency and other fancy effects that
can cause significant slowdown (much like it did in the original DOS
version on contemporary PCs!).  If you're feeling adventurous, highlight
the Detail Level option on the menu and press the X button to crank
things up to "Wild" mode.

Most of the secrets and cheats are not currently accessible, due to
the lack of a keyboard to enter the codes.  I plan on addressing this
in a future release of OpenTyrian DS, but for now you're out of luck
(except for the hidden difficulty levels, which I've enabled by default).

The default controls (which can be changed in the Options menu) are:
  D-Pad:	move ship in game; navigate menus
  A:		confirm button in menus
  B:		change Rear Weapon mode in game; go back in menus
  Y:		fire in game
  X:		nothing
  L:		fire left sidekick in game
  R:		fire right sidekick in game
  Select:	bring up menu in game; go back in menus
  Start:	confirm button in menus
  Touch:	drag to move cursor / ship, double-tap to click


BORING TECHNICAL STUFF

OpenTyrian DS uses SDL for video, timing, and input (just like OpenTyrian).
Specifically, it's built against my branch of GPF's port of SDL to
the DS--the same version of SDL I used for Rise of the Triad (ROTT)
and my other ports of SDL games.

It runs in 320x200 resolution, which means it's scaled down slightly
to fit the DS's screen.  This has the effect of making some of the
text difficult to read, but otherwise shouldn't affect much.

Network games are not currently supported.  OpenTyrian uses SDL_net
for this (I haven't tested to see how well it works), which has not
been ported to the DS, and there are likely other obstacles.

It uses custom code for audio, to take advantage of the DS's native
sound capabilities.  Tyrian's music is in the Loudness (LDS) format,
which is a form of OPL2 FM synthesis, originally designed for an
Adlib card or similar (which aren't too common any more, and we
certainly don't have on the DS).  OpenTyrian includes code to emulate
the required sound chips and produce a nice audio stream, and this
does work on the DS.  Unfortunately, the DS is not fast enough to
manage this in real-time and still play the game.  So, I took the
same route for music as I did for ROTT: extract the music tracks,
convert them to IMA-ADPCM WAVE files on a PC, and have the DS play
those instead.


CHANGELOG

v0.3 -	You can now map controls to B, L, and R on the Keyboard config screen
		(previously, B never worked; L and R only worked in scaled video mode).
		Also, Select will now unmap the selected control (rather than mapping
		it to the Select button), to make it easier to radically change the
		controls.

		Improved stability and increased performance.

		New, redesigned bottom screen in Full Game or single-player Arcade mode.

		Improved looping on a few of the songs (thanks moi, Renard!)

v0.2 -	Added option to not horizontally scale the display, to make text
		easier to read.  On the menus, use the L and R buttons to scroll
	   	left and right while in this mode; during actual gameplay, the
		statusbar (shields, weapons, generator, etc.) will appear on
		the bottom screen, while the actual playing field will appear on
		the top screen.  The main menu will still be scaled, because
		you don't lose anything there so you might as well not have to scroll.
		This mode is now the default; if you prefer the display to always
		be scaled, as it was in v0.1, you can toggle the scaling mode on the
		OpenTyrian menu (accessible from the main menu)--this replaces the
		fullscreen option, which is irrelevant on the DS.

		Fixed music volume control.

		Added menu options to the OpenTyrian menu to start Destruct
		(the artillery mini-game), Super Tyrian, and Super Arcade Mode,
		since we don't have a keyboard to type in the codes.

		Remapped controls for Destruct to be DS-friendly.  Only one-player
		mode is supported, due to lack of physicial buttons (and awkwardness).

		Increased gamma, for more vibrant colors.

		Fixed a bug causing a Guru Meditation crash when attempting to
		load a savegame.  This bug only affects games originally
		saved by OpenTyrian DS version 0.1 (and unfortunately, any
		existing such savegames remain corrupt).

v0.1 -	Initial public release.


THAT'S IT

The rest of this file is an excerpt from MANUAL.DOC,
which was distributed with the original DOS version.

--------------------------------------------------------


V) THE STORY

The year is 20,031.  You are Trent Hawkins, a terraformation pilot.  For 
three years, it has been your job to fly over tough-to-navigate planetary 
formations and check for habitable locations on newly terraformed planets. 
You execute more hair raising maneuvers in a day than most League trained 
pilots do during the course of their whole career.  After many years of war, 
however, you prefer blasting rock formations to vaporizing enemy starships.

Your latest assignment from the Interplanetary Council is Tyrian, a proposed 
trading world on the edge of the sector, near Hazudra territory.  The Hazudra 
are a lizard-like race recently discovered in a nearby asteroid field.  One 
of your fellow workers and close friends, Buce Quesillac, was a Huzudra.  
Yesterday Buce was shot in the back by a waiting hoverdrone that 
disappeared into the sky before you could blink, let alone stop it. 

Someone killed your best friend, and if it's the last thing you do, you're 
going to find out why.

The only lead you have is what Buce told you before he died....

"My friend...you must leave Tyrian now, or you will be killed.  Even after 
death, I could not bear to lose you.  Still, what I am about to tell you will 
mark you, so listen well...

You are familiar with the corporation that controls the terraformation of 
Tyrian, called Microsol.  They are responsible for my death.  And, do you 
remember that glowing rock we discovered in the mines west of here?  It was 
more than just a pretty mineral.  It is a new source of power called 
Gravitium.  Harness it, and engines will soon be obsolete.  It can... control 
gravity.  Microsol wants it, and will eliminate anyone who knows of its 
existence.  They captured me two days ago and tried to erase my memory as a 
warning.  They did not know my memory is holographic in nature, and cannot  
be wiped out.  Today I would reason that they discovered this, and found 
me to finish the job.

Now you must go, before they hunt you down.  Hurry!  Head towards Savara, 
the freeworld.  It will be difficult for them to follow you there.  GO!"

You ran to your quarters and found them torn apart.  Luckily you managed to 
obtain three weeks leave and a Gencore Hawk fighter.  You set out for Savara 
tomorrow, and grieve at the thought of telling your parents that your best 
friend has been murdered.  You grieve even further wondering how you're to 
stay alive with the whole of Microsol dogging your heels.

Preparing for a troubled day, you close your eyes at last, vowing to avenge 
Buce's death, not knowing that what will take place in the next three weeks 
will become the legend of Tyrian.

Ready yourself....


VI) MENUS AND OPTIONS

TITLE MENU 

When you run Tyrian, you will be taken to the title screen.  The selections 
you can choose at this menu are:

Start New Game: Begins a new game of Tyrian.  Tyrian has several modes of 
play:

	1-Player Full Game 
	1-Player Arcade 
	2-Player Arcade
	Modem/Network game 
	
The differences in gameplay for each of these modes are described later under 
"Playing Tyrian."

After you select the type of game you want to play, you will need to select
the difficulty of gameplay.  You can choose from Easy, Medium, or Hard 
difficulties.

	*SECRET*
	From the "Difficulty Select" screen type a capital "G" to switch 
	to the IMPOSSIBLE difficulty setting.

Load Game:  This selection will load a game that you previously saved.  The 
last level you completed will be saved automatically in the bottom save-game 
slot called Last Level.

Instructions: Choose this option to view the in-game manual with information 
on how to play.

Info: General information, version number, and legal stuff.

Quit: Takes you to the nether regions of DOS. 


GAME MENU

Once you've selected an episode and difficulty settings, you will be taken 
to the Game Menu.  From the Game Menu, you can modify your ship, change the 
game options, read the your datacubes, and enter the game. 

Data: (Only appears in Full Game).  This selection allows you to read any 
datacubes you've collected in the previous level.  Datacubes contain all 
the secret lowdown on the plot and extra tips and hints that may help you 
pass the next level.

Upgrade Ship: (Only appears in Full Game).  Takes you to the Ship 
Configuration Menu.

Player 1 Input/Player 2 Input: (Two Player Arcade game only.)  Lets you 
choose the controller for the first and second player.

Options: All control aspects of the game can be configured from this menu: 
Controls (joystick, mouse, and keyboard), loading and saving games (Full 
Game only), and music and sound volume.

Next Level: Takes you to the NAV screen, where you choose your next 
destination.  Choose wisely!  The datacubes you collect contain valuable 
info on planets you may want to steer clear of early on in the game.

Quit Game: Returns you to the title screen.

     
UPGRADE SHIP MENU (1-Player Full Game only)

The "Full Game" of Tyrian allows you to customize your ship's weapons and
defenses by buying and upgrading items.  Not only can you configure a ship 
of your own, but you can upgrade to 3 different ships during the game.  Each 
ship has strengths and weaknesses.  There are literally hundreds of 
ship configurations to choose from in Tyrian.

Remember that you need credits to purchase goods.  Your current credit is 
listed below the Armor and Shield bars under the ship display.

Ship Type

In a "Full Game," you begin with the standardized USP Perren Scout ship, 
which is a stripped down fighter craft with less armor than the usual 
Gencore League ships, but it's quite fast.  

At certain spaceports, you will have the opportunity to buy better ships.
Each ship has different Armor and Speed ratings.  These ratings are displayed
below the overhead view of your ship.

To purchase items, select the upgrade menu you want (e.g. Front Gun, Shields, 
etc.) and click on an item.  The first click on the item selects it for 
viewing, and the second click purchases it.     

Front Gun

To select a weapon for your front weapon port, just click on "Front Gun" 
from the Upgrade Ship Menu and take your pick.  

Each weapon has 11 levels of power, so if you have the cash (and the greed), 
use the left/right arrow keys to raise or lower the power of the weapon you 
have selected.  Or use the mouse and click on the arrows below the weapon 
simulator.

Rear Gun 

Each ship also has a rear weapon port.  Choose "Rear Gun" to select a rear 
weapon.  Some rear weapons have two configurations for even more fun!  The 
default key for changing your rear weapon mode during the game is the ENTER 
key.

Like the front weapons, the rear weapons also have 11 levels of power.  Just 
use the mouse and click on the arrows below the weapon simulator to increase 
or decrease the weapon's power.

Shields

Shields are the only things other than your armor keeping huge ionized beams 
from ripping into your ship and turning you into space bacon.  Be sure to 
upgrade them whenever possible.

Generators

Generators power your ship.  They determine how fast you can fire and how 
fast your shields recharge.  A good generator is the key to your offense and 
defense.

Sidekicks

Sidekicks are weapons that fly alongside your ship and provide you with 
additional firepower.  Each ship can have a left and a right Sidekick.  
These weapons range from single shot cannons to plasma storms that can 
devastate entire sectors of a planet.  

For weapons that have unlimited ammunition, simply firing your normal weapon 
also fires your Sidekick.  Sidekicks with that "charge-up" or have limited 
ammunition can be fired separately by using the CTRL and ALT keys.

Done

Returns to the Game Menu.


OPTIONS MENU

From here you can configure various aspects of Tyrian for maximum enjoyment.  
Here are the selections:

Load Game

Loads a game previously saved game. 

Save Game

Saves a game in progress.  The last level you completed is automatically 
saved as a backup game called "Last Game," saved in the last savegame slot.  
If you forget to save, just load the backup game and the last level you 
played will be loaded.

Music/Sound

You can change the music or sound volume with the left/right arrow keys or 
by clicking on the volume level desired with the mouse.

Joystick

With this selection you can recalibrate your joystick and assign different 
functions to each button.  

Keyboard

Allows you to change key functions to customize the keyboard configuration 
to your liking.
 
Quit Game

Ends the current game and returns you to the Title Screen.

Done

Returns you to the Game Menu.


PLAY NEXT LEVEL

Choosing "Play Next Level" takes you to the Nav screen, where you may select 
your next destination.  GET READY!  GET PSYCHED!  And get a holo-snack from 
your ship's bar.  Can't fight a whole fleet on an empty stomach, now can we?


VI) PLAYING TYRIAN 

ONE PLAYER FULL GAME

Once you've selected your preferred equipment of destruction, it's time to 
use it.  Just having a big gun doesn't mean you're a hotshot.  Your enemies 
know how you think.  The only way to beat them is for you to know them just 
as well.  And above all: violence is not the only route to victory.  Study 
your datacubes well.  They contain valuable information that could give you 
the edge you need to conquer the level that you just can't seem to beat. 
Know when you're walking into a death zone and prepare adequately, and you'll 
be one more step ahead... Good luck.

While playing, the screen will show your score on the bottom left.  
Destroying enemies and collecting coins will increase your score.  On the 
right side of the screen your shield and armor levels are displayed along 
with your power level, which will change when you fire.  Your options are 
also listed here, and if they have a limited number of shots the remaining 
ammunition will be displayed.

Collecting Coins                                     
During the game, enemies that you kill will occasionally drop coins.  Years 
ago, an ingenious starship designer developed a metal that, when heated to 
a certain temperature, forms huge metal coins that can be collected by other 
ships.  Council officials scoffed and called the project "something out of 
an ancient electronic game."  Nonetheless, the metal is still used in nearly 
every ship built.

Collect the coins and gems that fall for more credits. 

Datacubes
Datacubes provide valuable information about enemies and levels!  Grab 'em 
if you can!

Power ups
If you see a flashing metal pod emerge from a destroyed ship, grab it. It 
will power up your front or rear weapon from 2 to 5 levels!  If your ship is 
low on armor, a special armor supply ship will appear.  Destroy it and grab 
the armor powerup to repair your ship.

Well, you're on your own from here.  Be sure to destroy everything that 
moves (and in some cases, things that don't) or you're dust. The enemies 
here don't hand out extra lives, either.  Once you're dead, you have the 
opportunity to reconfigure your ship and continue the game.

Enjoy Tyrian, and may your lasers fire true!


ONE PLAYER ARCADE GAME 

If you would like to play Tyrian as a fast and furious arcade shoot 'em up, 
we've included one- and two-player arcade modes for you.  Simply select 
"One Player Arcade" or "Two Player Arcade" from the game select menu after 
hitting "Start New Game" in the Main Menu.

In a one player game you are not be able to upgrade your ship in between 
levels, but instead grab power ups throughout the game.  The arcade game has 
the same number of weapons to choose from as in the normal game.  However, 
even more firepower is obtainable from a "Special Weapon" option.

Power-ups
Front weapon power-ups are characterized by a blue ball with the weapon 
superimposed over the ball.  Power-up the front weapons by getting numerous 
purple power up balls.

Rear weapon power-ups look like red balls with a weapon icon superimposed 
over the ball.  Power-up the rear weapon by grabbing the metal power-ups 
that flash green and red!

Special Weapons
A Special Weapon can be acquired when either one of your weapons is charged 
near FULL capacity.  The small ship indicating your level of power at the 
top left hand corner of the screen reads the number "8" when a weapon is near
full capacity.  Beware, when you are hit you lose power.  

While some of the Special Weapons can be fired continuously, others can only 
be used after they have had enough time to recharge.

There are numerous special weapons...

Attractor: Attracts power ups and coins when you continually 
press the fire button.

Repulsor: Repulses shots when you continually press the fire 
button.

Ice Beam: when you press the fire button you will fire an ice 
shot, which freezes enemies.  Because of their inertia they can still move, 
but will be unable to fire shots. This is especially helpful with bosses, 
but only lasts for a limited amount of time on more powerful enemies.

Super Laser: continually pressing the fire button will release 
a coherent light blast powerful enough to devastate EVERYTHING in its path! 

Pearl Wind: ?

Power of Zinglon: ?

Flare: ? 


TWO PLAYER ARCADE GAME 

Tyrian has TWO PLAYERS capability!  As incredulous as it may sound, 
we've been able to double the amount of wreckage spilled across the screen, 
doubled the huge landscape ripping explosions, and of course, we've doubled 
the firepower. 

The Steel Dragon
Just having double the fun isn't enough, is it?  To complement this 
awesome mode, the first and second player can combine their ships into 150 
tons of deadly space fighter technology.  Called "The Steel Dragon", this 
ship consists of two parts, the "Dragonwing" and the "Dragonhead".  They are 
combined when the ships are close enough together to dock.  This concept was 
developed recently by a new firm, based on the jungle planet of Torm, and 
its name comes from the dragons which thrive there.  Three times as fast and 
hundreds of times more powerful than other fighters, this starship lives up 
to its namesake easily.  

Once combined, the first player has control of all ship movements, and the 
second player controls a special weapon turret that revolves around the 
ship, making up for its lack of speed and larger size.  The ships can be 
separated by one of two means:  Player 1 - holding down one of the Sidekick 
fire buttons and moving away from Player 2, or Player 2 stops firing and 
moves away from player 1.

Power-Ups
During the game, each player grabs power-ups which are dropped from enemies 
that you destroy.  Between the two ships, there are 18 kinds of weapons that 
can be picked up.  The Dragonhead's power-ups are superimposed over a blue 
ball.  The Dragonwing's power ups are shown over a dark red ball.  But, the 
upgrade capabilities of your ship don't stop there...

Your current weapon can be increased in power by grabbing the purple ball 
power-ups.  Also look for the mechanized power ups, which increase the 
other player's weapon by one level of power.

Many strategies are possible to beat tough-to-destroy enemies.  Try 
maneuvering in such a way that you can combine when you need extra firepower 
to destroy a particularly annoying boss.  You may also separate to create 
two targets for enemies to shoot at, making dodging easier.   

Weapons
The first player ship, the Dragonhead can power up with the following
weapons (blue power ups):

Pulse Cannon
Multi Cannon
Mega Cannon
Laser
Zica Super Laser
Proton Blaster
Vulcan Cannon
Lightning Gun
Missile launcher
Heavy Missile launcher

The Dragonhead has no charge capabilities for its weapon, but has a greater 
selection. It is also faster than the Dragonwing.

The second player ship, the Dragonwing, can power up with these weapons 
(dark red power ups):

Starburst
Multi Cannon
Sonic Cannon
Proton Blaster
Wild Cannon
Vulcan Cannon
Heavy Missile Launcher
Mega Pulse Beam

The second player ship's weapon has a special characteristic.  If you do 
not fire, the weapon charges for a much more damaging "super shot" that is 
released when your weapon is fully charged (two small blue balls orbiting 
a large one). The more powered-up your ship is, the faster it charges.
 
There are 11 levels of weapon power, giving you a selection of nearly 200 
different weapons!

Note: Version 2.0 of Tyrian has new weapons!  But we don't want to spoil the
fun of finding them by telling you what they are...


VII) THE WORLDS

The following information is all you could gather from your ships databanks. 
Although incomplete, it should give you enough information to begin your 
quest.  Information about the remaining planets can be acquired from 
datacubes that you collect during the game. 

TYRIAN:
Tyrian is the most recent acquisition of Microsol; the sector's largest 
corporation.  Since no single company can own a planet due to Article 17 
of the Interplanetary Council Law, Microsol is responsible for the 
terraformation and trading agreements.  Still, Microsol plans to bend 
Article 17.  It's up to you to stop them.

Tyrian is a world under terraformation, which means Microsol hires work 
teams in the hundreds of thousands to monitor gravity control, land 
sculpturing, and atmospheric maintenance.  Your job has always been to make 
laser measurements of surface features by flying over them at high speeds 
in a land skimmer at altitudes as low as ten feet.  Other team members handle 
atmosphere processors, robotic construction crews, even huge horticultural 
seed ships to plant entire forests in a fraction of the time.  Flying over 
Tyrian, one will notice some rather odd regions.  Floating rock formations 
due to gravity testing, large forests and rocky crags with occasional 
research facilities dot the landscape. 

SAVARA:
Savara, the only free world in the sector, is the only planet totally free 
of the Interstellar Government's policies.  The founders of the planet 
insisted that it be preserved as an agricultural world, and that, with
huge amounts of new plant and animal species, it's natural beauty was too 
important to disturb.  It thrives as a vacation spot as well as an 
excellent trading world, though Tyrian is expected to overshadow it once it 
begins operation.  It is also one of the only planets to support an 
underwater colony.  Huge towers can be seen rising out of the vast oceans 
at certain points.  Savara is an ideal place for trade and repair, however 
Microsol is suspected to have a secret base there despite the mandates that 
outlaw any company craft.

DELIANI:
A triumph of mankind, Deliani's nickname is "TechWorld," due to it's 
sprawling cities and gleaming skyscrapers populating the surface.  Deliani 
is the equivalent of ancient Earth's "New York City,": if one wants 
something, legal or illegal, one usually finds it here.  The economic 
prosperity enjoyed by Deliani is only the sliver lining of the dark cloud of 
crime that exists there.  Even though the planet is the home of Microsol's 
chief competitor, Gencore Tech Alliance, many acts of greed and corruption 
still run rampant.  Gencore was formed not only to restore order to Deliani, 
but to deliberately oppose Microsol in it's sinister dealings.  Those who 
have crossed Microsol usually flee to Deliani to seek refuge with Gencore. 
Beware, flight in Deliani is nerve wracking, due to the tight spaces and 
clusters of towers.

GYGES:
The original headquarters of Microsol.  This planet has a very dry and 
desert-like surface with the occasional mountain range.  Microsol's interest
in this world lies in its weak inner crust, which allows for construction of 
underground research facilities.  Immense domed cities can be seen in major 
research and production locations.  The tragedy of Gyges is that it was 
originally the home of the Zica, an unknown race of alien that originally 
carved immeasurable labyrinthine tunnel systems under the surface.  Microsol 
drove them out, disregarding the rights of an entire race, vaporizing 
entire colonies at a time.  The Zica are feared by xenoscientists.  Xeno-
scientists believe the Zica have fled to the outer reaches of the sector 
where they plan to launch a massive attack on Gyges and Microsol, using 
outer-dimensional technology.  But is it true...?

REMUS:
Sector capital and regional chapter of the Interplanetary Council, Remus 
is one of the largest worlds in the sector.  Remus is surpassed in size only 
by the ice world of Camanis.  Its surface is similar to Savara's, though 
consisting of grasslands and heavily forested mountain regions.  The city 
capital, Portoch, is a metropolis of corruption and dark, rainy days.  The 
buildings are so neglected they are streaked with dirt, providing a 
depressing atmosphere.  It is said that the chapter lords are so decadent 
that they seldom emerge from the local simulation clubs.  The city itself is 
an example of why Microsol holds so much sway in council policies: bribery.


IX) CREDITS 

Jason Emery: programming, level design, additional artwork, weapon design, 
additional sound FX
Alexander Brandon: story, music, coordinator, design, online help
Daniel Cook: level artwork & design
Robert Allen: our eminent producer, additional sound FX, additional design
Arturo Sinclair: 3d artwork, title design
Bruce Hsu: character portrait design
John Calcagno: 3d animation
Andrew Paquette: character portrait artwork, additional 3d artwork
Andreas Molnar: LOUDNESS Sound System programming & music conversion
Susan Aldworth: Voices
Nando Eweg: sound FX

Many thanks to Tim Sweeney (basically, master of all), Mark Rein (manual 
design & marketing), Arjan Brussee, Cliff Bleszinski, and Rob Elam 
(entertainment).

Additional thanks go to our families and the Epic Beta Testers!

